

----------------------- REVIEW 1 ---------------------
PAPER: 7
TITLE: A Coq Library For Internal Verification of Running-Times
AUTHORS: Jay McCarthy, Burke Fetscher, Max New and Robert Bruce Findler

OVERALL EVALUATION: 2 (accept)
REVIEWER'S CONFIDENCE: 4 (high)

----------- REVIEW -----------
This paper presents a Coq library whose central component is a monad
for proving that the running time of a program is a given function.
The monad does not only keep track of time counts but also correctness
properties, making it possible to verify the running time of more
programs than previous work by Danielsson (2008).

The paper is well written, and the results are solid. In particular,
Section 6 lists an impressive number of case studies, and these alone,
I think, constitute an important contribution. Special attention is
paid to the efficiency of extracted code, which makes the result more
meaningful in practice. (We definitely do not like the situation where
a program is proved to have a nice running time but actually runs
slower because of the proof.)

The authors use only simple datatypes and place invariants in the
monad (rather than in the datatypes themselves), "allow[ing]
programmers to write idiomatic code". I do not think programs dealing
with more precisely defined data structures are necessarily very
different from (or more difficult to write than) "idiomatic code", nor
is the code extracted from them necessarily less efficient (as
explained in Conor McBride's and Edwin Brady's work). In this case, I
would guess that baking the invariants into the datatypes might
simplify the overall structure. I am not against the authors'
decision, though — it might be easier to separate programs and proofs
in Coq as much as possible (according to my limited knowledge of Coq).

A more serious flaw is that the running time function has to be
"predicted" accurately, down to the constants. This is simply too much
for most people (with the notable exception of Knuth), and severely
restricts the usability of the library. Not being able to reason just
asymptotically is already a problem with Danielsson's 2008 work, and
it is kind of disappointing to see that the authors do not try to
tackle it. That being said, the problem is difficult enough, so it is
understandable that the authors do not confront it in this paper.

Some typos:

p1 "intentional properties" -> intensional

p3 "sub-trees" -> subtrees  (a form which you use in other places)

p5 "straight-forward" -> straightforward  (twice)

p10 (& p11) Big \Theta, Big O: delete 'Big'  (\Theta and O are already
  big themselves)

p10 O(log), \Theta(log) -> log n

p10 "There 1,797 lines of code" -> There are

p10 "an library" -> a


----------------------- REVIEW 2 ---------------------
PAPER: 7
TITLE: A Coq Library For Internal Verification of Running-Times
AUTHORS: Jay McCarthy, Burke Fetscher, Max New and Robert Bruce Findler

OVERALL EVALUATION: 1 (weak accept)
REVIEWER'S CONFIDENCE: 3 (medium)

----------- REVIEW -----------
The paper presents a technique for verifying programmers' assertions
that calls to a given function have the expected cost, in a cost model
chosen by the programmer. Despite the title, the cost model may count
memory consumed, operations performed, or both.

I am not an expert in program verification or fluent in Coq, so I cannot
evaluate whether the paper's technique is novel, but the paper is well
written, and I believe I understand the outlines of how the system works.
I can also understand most, not all of the technical details, and they
seem fine.

So far, the technique has been tried only on small pieces of code.
For these, computing the *exact* cost of a call, and then trivially
classifying the cost as to complexity class (linear, quadratic, n log n etc)
works, as shown by the results in the paper. I wonder whether for larger
pieces of code, for which authors care only about the complexity class,
would the overhead of computing the cost *exactly* be too much work?
(This is not a criticism of this paper; I am fully aware that you
have to be able to walk before you can try running.)

The authors are frank about the limitations of the technique,
with respect to e.g. the presence of irrelevant code in the OCaml
extracted from Coq, and propose mitigation strategies, strategies
that I (as a compiler writer) think will probably work.

I commend the authors for making public the software involved in the project.

--------------------------------------------------

Detailed comments:

Page 1:
In the body of the paper, it becomes clear that your talk in the title
and the abstract about "time" is really talking about a cost model
that is effectively a parameter of your technique, but before readers
get there, it looks wrong. A count of operations is different from running
time. Due to things like cache effects, when comparing two algorithms,
the one with the higher operation count may actually have the LOWER runtime.
Talking about "time" is thus misleading, since predicting actual
execution time would require a microarchitectural model of the CPU.

Page 2:
"to give it a very precise specification": it is unclear what kind of
"precision" you mean. If you mean that the return type can express
not only the value to be returned but also the cost of computing that value,
as the second half of the sentence is trying to say, then talking about
"precision" is more likely to misdirect readers than to help them.

"mt" is a strange abbreviation for "empty".

Things like "!<!" are strange choices for syntax.

Page 3:
Showing the correct parenthesization of the code in figure 1 involving
+= and <== would help; I expect few readers will know their precedence.
Choosing better syntax would probably help even more.

Why do you use "bt" to denote the version of t with j inserted? bt can
be confused with "braun tree". Something like "jt" or "tj" would be better.

Page 4:
Wouldn't it be more common for mistakes when writing += expressions
to yield assertions about running times that CANNOT be proven because
they are false?

Page 5:
Where do the "larger constant factors" come from? Don't put the mention
of linearization into the MIDDLE of your discussion of the cost model.

Where does the S in "(S n)" come from? How does "SequenceR" know HOW
to turn the tree into a sequence? Not all readers are experts in Coq.

Page 6:
"For a given A and P...": don't use "a" and "an" as variable names.
They are FAR too easy to mistake it for the English words. Having them
in a different font doesn't help enough.

"function-specific specification": there is more than one function
in this discussion. Say which one you mean.

Page 7:
Mention inc before bind, since you describe it first, and because without inc,
bind can only ever add 0+0.

Page 8:
"that ensures the argument is at least": why emphasize this "at least"?
It is only a *consequence* of the property you care about, NOT the property
itself.

Page 9:
"... as a shorthand for ...": the "am" is not in the shorthand notation.

"the extraction ... have no dynamic content": I don't undestand what this
is trying to say, and the noun/verb disagreement doesn't help.

"values returned by monadic commands are equal": what values, which monadic
commands, and what does their equality imply? Are you talking about the
associativity of the rest of the paragraph, or something else?

Page 10:
Why is iterative fib O(n^2)?

Why no n in O(log)?

Would you care to say why you didn't prove the correctness of those two
algorithms? (I see you do, three paragraphs later.) I would say "In all cases
except make_array_linear and red/black tree insertion, the proofs of
the running time include proof of the correctness of the algorithm".

Page 11:
I can guess when a function named "is_even" would return true,
but this wouldn't be true for a function named "even_odd_dec".

Page 12:
You could try to make the extracted version readable by adding redundant
parentheses.

Page 13:
I would list the functions in each category when I *introduce* the categories.

"leaves natural numbers in the extracted code": playing what role, if any?
If they are ignored, it should be possible to optimize them away, as you talk
about for the output of your system, just above. If they are not, how come they
don't screw up the output of the program?

Page 14:
"resources bounds and costs": I think this is missing a word or two.

"we use AN equivalence relation"

--------------------------------------------------

Comments about another review:

Not being a Coq expert, I actually appreciated being shown bind1 and bind2
before bind3. Without them, I would have thought that bind3 was
needlessly overcomplicated, and I can't think of a shorter way
to explain why the extra complexity is in fact needed than the example
of bind1 and bind2. Maybe you can.

As for the list of function names in section 6, I can guess what those
functions do and therefore how big they are. When looking at system
evaluations, knowing how well the system scales is always important.
Those function names give me a pretty good idea of the answer to that
question, even though I did not look up the github repo.

While I agree that open access principles make long-term storage of
supplementary materials extremely desirable, I don't think the absence
of a standard mechanism for that is fault of the authors of this paper,
and including even a significant portion of the relevant code in the paper
would have blown away the page limits.

On the other hand, I agree about += and <== being less than optimal notations.


----------------------- REVIEW 3 ---------------------
PAPER: 7
TITLE: A Coq Library For Internal Verification of Running-Times
AUTHORS: Jay McCarthy, Burke Fetscher, Max New and Robert Bruce Findler

OVERALL EVALUATION: 1 (weak accept)
REVIEWER'S CONFIDENCE: 3 (medium)

----------- REVIEW -----------
The authors provide a method to reason about the running time of
functional programs by enriching post-conditions with a notion of time
spent.  At the heart on there method lies a monad-like structure

  C (A : Set) (P : A -> Nat -> Prop)

which enriches a return value of type A with a postcondition on A and
a natural number, which is interpreted as running time.  Using a
"tick" operation the programmer can annotate the program with time
usage of the individual operations.  In that, it likens Danielsson's
(2008) approach, only that the presence of an arbitrary post-condition
P gives extra flexibility in specifying and processing run-times.

The work described in the article is mostly practical, there is a Coq
library for this monad-like structure, and one for reasoning about
run-times with big-O-notation.

I am sympathetic to their approach although I do not know how the
great flexibility (arbitrary P) leads to a large number of proof
obligations, and I do not know how original the approach is.

Unfortunately, the paper misses a bit the style for a conference
publication.  Instead of giving technical details of their "monad",
the authors slowly approach the formulation they ended up with, giving
incorrect formulations on the way which they refine.  The experienced
researcher, who is the target of FLOPS, might be easily bored by the
slow pace.  Further, a lot of the text reads like a commentary on the
supplementary material which is not meaningful without going through
all of it.  I cannot fight the feeling that this paper reads more like
a final report of a student project rather than a conference paper.

I wonder what the worth of this paper without access to the
supplementary material is in its current write-up.  Is it ensured that
the github repo will be live long enough?  Will FLOPS ensure the
availability of the supplementary material, and for how many decades?
The availability of the paper is ensured by national library systems,
but I do not know anything for github repos.  Thus, I think the paper
should make sense but itself, rather than being mostly a commentary on
the supplementary material.  It should be self-contained to the extend
that the necessary technical details can be reconstructed, ideally
without too much effort.

While I welcome the approach of the authors and the serious effort
spent on a practical evaluation, I can only weakly recommend
acceptance for FLOPS, for the reasons given above.

DETAILS

Please supply page numbers in submission versions!

Section 2

Use of infix operations += and <==.

  I would suggest "tick" and "return" instead of += and <==.
  The operators you use are commonly used as infix operators, so the
  reader of the programs might be confused.

Section 5

"The Monad"

  C is not really a monad, and bind is a curried version of an
  application operation.

Definition of "ret"

  ... is simply a triple (a, 0, Pa0) using the appropriate pairing
  constructions.  Somehow your argument that you do not give the
  definition here is longer than actually giving the definition.

bind1/bind2/bind3

  Why dragging the reader through your complete thought process,
  rather than giving the solution?

  You could save a lot of space, and invest it into giving the
  definitions of return and bind and prove properties about them in
  the paper (rather than just in the supplementary material).

Section 6

"The functions in the first category are: <<long list>>"

  Who wants to read this?
  The reader knows nothing of these functions, unless he has read all
  of your code.

Section 7

"Danielsson ... leaves residue in the extracted code"

  Using Coq's current extraction.  There are more aggressive
  extractors, like the one of Idris, which can get rid of
  computationally irrelevant parts without needing a static Prop/Type
  distinction.